 i know it's a little early to call this, but i'm gonna go ahead and put this in the books that i think we just got the worst movie that 2024 will experience. we basically got the lord of the rings gollum for movies already this year. and i know i said something similar when night swim dropped a couple months ago, but i think mega mine 2 doom syndicate is much worse, and i'd like to explain why. it just dropped today, and i've already had the entire day ruined by watching it, so i wouldn't wish that curse upon my worst enemy. i know that's not shocking news, there's no one surprised to hear that this is horrible, but i was certainly surprised at just how atrocious it is. just by giving it the old eyeball test, everyone who looked at any of the trailers or like the 6 minute sneak peek they gave, could immediately recognize that they really brought their a game when making mega mine vs the doom syndicate. and by any game, i mean ass game. this shit looks like turbo ass. fuck me, it is, it's an eye sore to watch. and the only known cure for sore eyes, as recommended by optometrists, is god's lap, baby. that's right, the worst movie of the year may have just dropped, but the best comic of the year just came out. god's lap issue 5 is here right now. you can pick up a copy at badeg.co link in the description. first of all, it follows a beloved animated film from 2010, the original mega mine was a huge hit, people really liked it. and that was 14 years ago, so it's old enough now to be calling your mother a whore on xbox live. and out of nowhere, peacock announced that they were going to be releasing the sequel this year. and people were pumping their fish like, yeah more mega mine, let's go! until they watch the trailer. immediately, you can see that the mega mine sequel looks significantly worse than the original. not only does it look worse than the movie from 2010, it looks worse than the video games from 2010 that were just shovelware. the mega mine playstation game, which was legitimately just a quick cash grab because that was during the era where every movie had a subsequent game release, just to continue double dipping, double fisting, and the consumers pocketbook. it somehow looks worse than that game, which again was just a quick cash grab. so what was the point? i don't really get it. after watching the movie, it really seems like they did this purely out of obligation, or they did this to test if ai could make a full movie. and i know that's a criticism that gets tossed around a lot, but i really do think ai had a strong hand in the creation of mega mine doom syndicate. there's just no reason for its existence. i'd call it a waste of money, but it doesn't feel like they spent any money on it in the first place. like everyone could recognize from the trailer, it looks horrible. it's as cheaply made as possible. jimmy neutron is more visually appealing than this. it's just i don't get why the fuck they'd make it to begin with. it's not like they even really had a story to tell either. it is as simple as it gets. mega mine's the hero now, the doom syndicate, they want him to be evil again, so he puts on this facade that he's evil and only pretending to be a hero. and it's just such a snooze fest. like nothing happens at all because they didn't want to animate anything at all. so even when you reach the end of the movie where they're having like the final showdown between mega mine and the doom syndicate, it looks like you're watching a scene out of the but ugly martians. they put no effort into any aspect of this. i thought maybe they were saving the budget for the final fight, but that was actually the worst animation for the entire film. so the final fight, it's basically one move for each member and it defeats them. so you know, the hypnotist, he gets defeated because mega mine pours a little bit of concrete on him. the lady who's controlling the weather, shooting lightning, she gets defeated because he has her shoot the lightning and it redirects at her and it defeats her. and her defeat is a clip i'd really love to play because it is the perfect example of how lazy this shit is. the lightning hits her and she's like, oh, and they don't bother animating anything. so what they do is they just drag her down and then she falls over. the word stiff doesn't even do it justice. it really feels like this was left in by accident. like it was like the pre-vis, you know, before they go in and polish it up, but then they said, eh, fuck it, run it. just let me just print it as is. it's so bad. there's nothing in here that's even remotely interesting. the writing is just the safest by the numbers, formulaic lines ever, non-stop puns out the wazoo, which really makes me feel like ai had a large role to play in it because a lot of the puns feel like something chat gpt would spit out if you're trying to do like a comedy night with it. it just doesn't work at anything it even aims to do because it doesn't aim to do anything. it's just actually a waste of an hour and 25 minutes. i think it's actually just there to be noise for children. like there's no other purpose for it. it's just a lot of fucking noise for kids, but it doesn't realize that in this day and age, kids get unlimited amount of noise through things like tiktok, where parents just sit them down in front of an ipad and they just endlessly doom-scroll tiktok. this is going to be boring even to them because the attention span has rotted so far deteriorated to such a alarming degree. this wouldn't do anything. like i don't think kids are going to be, you know, mega-mind doom syndicate fans because it's fucking boring. i can't think of a single redeeming quality about this movie. pretty much no one can. it has like a 6% on rotten tomatoes. so not even like the most generous critics in the world can drum up a single compliment for it. i would hesitate to call this better than food fight, which is that animated disaster that i'm sure everyone remembers because it's been mean to death. it is infamous in how bad food fight is and i would say that this isn't really any better. i would actually say that this is more soulless than food fight at the very least. the only thing worse than watching mega-mind doom syndicate is watching mega-mind rules. the tv show spin-off that they also released the same day as this movie. so big surprise if you didn't get this news. they released this sequel movie, super stinker, and then they also said, and guess what? there's more, and released an 8 episode tv series, and holy shit the tv series is even worse. i didn't watch all 8 episodes i couldn't. i made it through 3. i don't know if there's a human being strong enough on this planet to power through all 8 of those episodes without blowing their brains out. it is torturous. it's so insultingly bad. and yes, i get that this is made for kids, but that doesn't mean that it has to be unwatchably shitty. avatar the last year, bender. the primary audience was made for kids, but in any one of all ages can appreciate it. a good show, even if it's aimed at a younger audience, can be appreciated and enjoyed by people of all ages. that's the sign of good high quality entertainment. this is definitely not that. i think they would have been better off just making a mega-mind world in fortnite custom games. it would have at least been a little more entertaining, if you put mini games in there, something. but watching the movie or the show here is just not worth it at all to anybody of any age i imagine. like i said, i don't see this being a hit with children because it's at its core boring. it's a nothing burger. there is nothing that happens in the show or movie at all. at most, what you'll get is mega-mind firing his blaster. and that's it. there's really nothing else. the villains barely use their powers at all, really. i mean, they kind of do, but they only use it for like a single projectile each, mainly. it's just, ugh, so lame. i don't think anyone is going to like this at all. and i'm not saying the only way for this to have been successful is to have a ton of action or anything, but, jiminy christmas, it certainly would have helped keep you awake when watching it. the writing is just so bad. like even like for a kid's show, it's bad. spongebob is a kid's show. and that has great writing. like it doesn't matter how old you are or anything. it has great writing if you're fucking three years old or 30 years old. mega-mind, i don't think it's going to appeal to any age whatsoever. like if you put this on, if you put on mega-mind rules while you are pregnant, even your fetus would be bothered by it. it starts kicking and throwing a tantrum inside your belly. it'd be trying to find ways to strangle itself with the umbilical cord or something. like it is miserable. no one i think will like this. mega-mind versus doom's indicates sucks his movie. mega-mind rules sucks his show. it was a waste of time. a complete waste of time. so yeah, that's really about it. see ya..
